well good afternoon everybody this is my
July 2020 planetarium show and I've set
the software stellarium up for the 1st
of July of 2020 and we're just in the
early part of the afternoon at this
point and we're gonna let time run
forward and its gonna run forward till
10:15 in the evening which is we need to
go that far because it won't really be
dark otherwise at this time of year
there's nights are very short so here's
the Sun rapidly disappearing down behind
the tree down behind the horizon the
color of the sky getting that nice steep
orange red color of sunset and the first
stars beginning to show up just about
now there we go
so we're gonna zoom in on one of those
stars the bright one just above the tree
there this is the star capella and this
is actually a pair of yellow giant stars
that orbit around each other so close
together that we can't separate them
even with the software that we're using
here but the best telescopes are able to
do that that was first done by one in
Cambridge called coasts the cambridge
optical aperture synthesis telescope but
now we're looking over towards the south
and the constellation of Libra
there's the stick diagram for a Libra
one of the constellations of the zodiac
where we find all of the planets and the
moon of course that's the very bright
thing there's the scales for Libra
scales of justice being the symbol for
the constellation and the very bright
thing there is the moon we always find
the moon and the planets along the line
through these famous constellations
because the solar system is a flat disc
and as such that flat disc rejects to
give a line right around the sky in
which we find all these objects of the
solar system so let's so look at the
moon in detail the zoom right in you'll
see it's 3/4 phase that's called give us
a particular shape and you can see the
dark moiré on the moon the seas of the
moon and these are giant impact scars
caused by huge space rocks that hit the
moon early in its lifetimes about three
and a half billion years ago
punching great holes in the crust and
releasing the molten rock from inside
the core of the moon to come up and
flood over the surface and that flood
basalt rock molten lava is the reason
why they look so smooth in appearance
and very dark as well dark due to the
age due to the weathering effect of the
solar wind all those charged particles
coming from the Sun a little bit of
Milky Way there as we zoom back out on
the left-hand side down to the horizon
we're now going to look at the next-door
constellation of Virgo the next one
round in the zodiac traveling Eastwood's
there it is laid out you just see Libra
on the left there so there's Virgo in a
virgin hair on there and you can just
see the scales of Libra to the east
there now when we're looking in this
direction we're looking out of our Milky
Way galaxy by almost the shortest route
straight up out of the plane of the
galaxy and so we see lots of other
galaxies not obscured by all the stuff
nearby and here's the Virgo cluster a
very large cluster of galaxies about 50
million light-years from us but the
gravity of all of these is the
high-resolution shot is the gravity of
all of this loss are so strong that the
Milky Way and the Andromeda galaxy are
all being attracted towards this and
we're doing two million miles an hour in
that direction it's like a very long
time to get there 50 million light years
very very long way indeed so just above
Virgo we've got the next constellation
on the tour and that is Bootes the
herdsman it's a kite shaped
constellation with a couple of
sticky-out arms at the bottom there I
though I think they're probably the
herdsman z' feet we'll see the there is
knees look
marking out his knees so Bootes the
herdsman not a constellation most people
have heard about well it's a very bright
and very prominent at this time of year
directly south and nice and high up so
you can really see it very easily
the brightest star is Arcturus
that's just 37 light years away from the
Sun so relatively nearby and almost the
same s as our Sun a little bit heavier
but older as well seven billion years
instead of five billion years so it's
gone through its fuel and it's now into
the red giant phase giving it their
orange e red color just outside our
galaxy we have 400 of these globular
clusters we'll see several of them on
this tour and this is globular cluster
m3 sir about half a million stars
clustered together in a ball shape
there's the high-resolution image packed
together very very tightly right in the
center so that we cannot really see them
but these objects are very beautiful
when you see them through a telescope
because the stars all seem to shine like
jewels on a velvet background one of my
favorite objects to look at now we're
looking at a constellation called Coma
Berenices Bernice's hair you just see
three stars in a kinked line there as
the stick diagram but you can already
see down to the right-hand end where the
knot eat part of the hair is supposed to
be there's a cluster of stars called
Merlotte's one one one well worth
looking at that with binoculars it's a
very big open cluster and just above
coma we have the hunting dogs there that
just disappeared this too is an area in
which we can go and explore for objects
out in deep space here's a nice one this
is the black eye galaxy 24 million light
years away so half the distance of the
Virgo cluster nicely aligned spiral
galaxies but it does look like someone's
punched it in the face there's very dark
just like giving it that black
I type appearance which you can easily
see even with a small telescope so next
door to the black eye galaxy just
towards the direction of boo tears we've
got another of these globular clusters
and in fact we can zoom in on this one
here you can see another one to the left
hand side of the screen they're all over
the place there are about 400 of these
this one's a bit further away and it's
nearly sixty thousand light years but
they're all outside the Milky Way so the
nearest is about twenty five thousand
light years and then they're scattered
all around the disk of the Milky Way
marking the outer edges they're like
miniature galaxies in themselves micro
galaxies it's possible that they are the
cause of small galaxies that have come
too close to the Milky Way and had all
of their outer layers stripped away by
the enormous gravity of our main Milky
Way galaxy we think each one of them
possibly contains a small black hole in
the center as well we'll talk more about
that in when we see the next one on the
tour we're now gonna let x move around
to midnight just to get the proper dark
of the skies some satellites whizzing
across the screen here those are known
by the software and you can track them
and lie in wait outside to observe them
by finding when the best time is using
Stellarium but here's the constellation
of Hercules riding high above us to the
south very well worth finding you can
see this for a keystone shape in the
middle that's Hercules the hero's body
with his arms and legs marked out there
he's upside down
he's Barry's feet in the air a lot of
things in astronomy end up being upside
down it all depends where you're looking
at it from and if you've got a mirror
involved that inverts things so anyway
this is Hercules the hero
we're going to look about two-thirds of
the way up the right hand side of the
Keystone here for another of these
globular clusters and this one is
perhaps the most famous this is the
great globular cluster in Hercules
absolutely beautiful object to look at
half a million stars
and it's one of the nearest ones as well
at 25,000 light years there's the
high-resolution image and see how
beautiful that looks and the better your
telescope the further into the center
you can see as individual stars another
one here just to show there really are
lots of them this one's just a little
bit further away a little bit smaller
and Messier catalog entry number 92 they
all have these M numbers because Charles
Messier made a list of all of these
things in the sky for us to look at he
actually was interested in comets and
these were irritating things that were
not comets and from his point of view
but there we use it as a reference to a
lot of these lovely objects in the sky
so we've pulled back away there and
we're twisting around and going to look
at the constellation of Lyra now that's
the parallelogram of stars that you can
see they're marked out with the lines
and the one star off to the side Vega
the brightest star in Lyra and Lyra is
supposed to be a Greek musical
instrument a liar so it's like a harp a
miniature harp like instrument so we'll
take that away and as you can see it's
just next door to Hercules one or two
interesting objects here but so let's
just have a look at the bright star Vega
that's 25 light-years away from us and
it's a bit more massive and hotter than
our Sun and burns 40 times more luminous
and at 9,000 degrees whereas the Sun is
5,800 degrees
so these hotter stars they burn their
fuel hotter because they're more massive
but they'll end their lives more quickly
because they run through the fuel even
more prodigiously fast than the amount
of extra fuel they've got due to being
heavier and when they run out of fuel
when the Sun runs out of fuel it'll turn
into one of these this is a planetary
nebula nothing to do with planets this
is a star that has blown off its outer
fear like a smoke ring in space and
exposed the dead nuclear core that white
dot in the middle is a white dwarf star
which is the remains leftovers of the
nuclear reactor that was at the heart of
the star before it died a very beautiful
objects to look at usually have a lot of
color in them so moving away from Lyra
we have the constellation of Cygnus
which huge arms spread out up and down
and that short tail and the long neck of
Cygnus the Swan there now it really does
look like we creature that it's supposed
to from the way that the stars are laid
out and the body of the Swan runs along
the line of the Milky Way in the sky so
it's full of rich structure and rich
star clusters just over here towards the
end of one of the wings of the Swan
we've got the remains of an exploded
star a giant star that has blown up at
the end of its life as a supernova
leaving behind these shockwaves of
expanding gas this is called the veil
nebula now this could be quite a
difficult object to find even with a
powerful telescope unless you use the
right filter to take away the scattered
light and pick up just the light from
the nebula usually an oxygen-free filter
is the one to use for that and here is
another expanding shell of gas but this
time it's being blown off a star that's
still going it's a very very massive
star about a hundred times the mass of
our Sun and almost as big as they get
called a wolf-rayet star and it's
burning so energetically it's blown away
all its outer layers will the hydrogen
and just left the cautery active core
the helium burning core in the center of
this massive star but that too will
explode as a supernova before very much
longer these giant stars live fast and
die young so we're going to look at some
of the other star clusters that there
are a star clouds and nebulae this
the North American nebula up at the tail
end of the Swan next to the bright star
Deneb and it's so big we don't have to
zoom in very far at all
actually a telescope is the wrong thing
to use to look for this binoculars is
the way to go there's the
high-resolution Hubble image using a
different filter so we're seeing that
hydrogen gas in yellow in this filter
there it is in a more natural color
hydrogen usually gives that pink color
you can see it looks like North America
with the Gulf of Mexico the dark bit
there so now going to move down to the
other end of Cygnus the Swan down to the
beak all the way along this spine of a
swan and a length of the Milky Way there
to this star Albireo the beak of the
Swan and this is a double star where you
can separate the two components very
easily and one of them is blue and one
of them is orange and they make a lovely
contrast in color against the blackness
of space
so we'll worth having a look at even
with binoculars so that's the Cygnus the
Swan now down to the near the near
Albireo near the beak we've got the coat
hanger and this is not a constellation
this is just a chance alignment of a few
stars and it's called an asterism
because of that they're not all at the
same distance it just happened to line
up and give you that impression of an
upside down coat hanger and just next
door to it is the dumbbell nebula this
dumbbell shape or hourglass shape of
expanding gas again is one of these
sun-like stars that's blowing off its
outer layers and it's doing so along and
around its North and South Poles in
these two cone shapes and that's typical
of these planetary nebulae that die like
that leaving behind a white dwarf and
these rings of material in space of
course all the elements that are made in
these dying stars when they shed their
outer layers go on to form
new generations of stars in millions of
years time and the heavier elements end
up in the planets of those stars and of
course that's how we came to be because
the Sun is probably about a
third-generation star so we've now moved
over to the lower part of the sky
towards the south and the constellation
Scorpio the scorpion can just see the
three prongs they're representing this
clause of the scorpion and the bright
star there the bright orange starlets
and the star Antares just to the east of
where we started with Libra and the moon
a little look around
Terri's this is a real whopper of a star
it's a giant where supergiant star
putting out 10,000 times the light
energy of the Sun and an awful lot of
infrared and heat as well and some
coming to the end of its life and again
it's going to explode as a supernova
when it runs out of fuel but this part
of the skies the direction towards the
center of our Milky Way and this is why
it's full of so many star clouds here's
the constellation of Sagittarius just
next door to Scorpio another of the
constellations of the zodiac and this
one looks like a teapot in the stick
diagrams of me but it's supposed to
represent an archer I'm showing the
archer yeah so we've looked at Virgo and
Libra and Scorpio and Sagittarius four
of the constellations of the zodiac but
as I said this is the dense star clouds
of the central Milky Way in this
direction and here's one of them it's
called the Eagle Nebula and right in the
center they may recognize those dark
streamers those are the pillars of
creation photographed by the Hubble
Space Telescope in a very iconic image
that was one of the first and most
spectacular images when it made itself
operational just below that we have the
Swan nebula looks like a swan
heads a bit faint the bright area of the
wings and then a sort of s shape of the
neck
curling away from it you can just about
make that out does look like a swan
through a telescope but again it's a
star-forming region these star clouds
collapse here's another one is the
Lagoon Nebula this is a little bit
further along the evolutionary trail you
can see emergent from the centre
there'll a whole group of young hot
stars and they radiation coming from
those stars is now blowing a bubble in
the Lagoon Nebula and blowing away the
gas that was their birth cloud again
another one here's the trifid nebula
here we've got the red color of hydrogen
dark dust lanes where new stars are
being born and a few of the already
burning stars that are burning hot and
bright and blue are bouncing some of
their blue light back off the upper
clouds they're giving those clouds a
blue tinge that's just the reflected
starlight from the hot blue stars so we
pull back away from the constellation of
Sagittarius there and they start clouds
in the Milky Way and we have a look at
these couple of bright objects right
over to the left-hand side of the screen
there first one it's Jupiter king of the
planets the largest planet in the Solar
System and you can see off to the left
there three of its moons Europa Ganymede
and Callisto you see the planets this is
what it would look like with a small
telescope the disk of the planet with
dark cloud belts across it but we can
zoom in give the effect of a very
powerful telescope and see much more
detail this is the sort of image that
I'm able to obtain from my home
Observatory it's about like this and
here we have the disc of the planet with
the clouds in glorious detail see the
Great Red Spot there as well some other
spots you can also see the little moon
Io the innermost of Jupiter's large
moons and the black dots
that's the
shadow of Io where it's creating an
eclipse I'm blocking the sunlight
casting its shadow onto the main planet
let's zoom right in having centered IO
up and see the shadow there and of
course if we zoom right in with us the
super zoom on this we can get to a great
view of the disk of Io covered in sulfur
all those black dots those are volcanoes
and IO is just covered in them and
recoated its entire surface with a
sulfuric output of these enormous
volcanoes by far the most volcanic place
in the solar system second moon from
Jupiter is Europa it's about the same
size as IO and there they're both about
the same size as our Moon but it's
covered in ice and has these dark
grooves which seem to be oozing some
sort of organic slime out of them and we
think that there is a ocean many
kilometers deep underneath the ice in a
protected environment kept warm and
probably somewhere that life might be
able to take hold so very interesting
prospect
here's Ganymede the third moon from
Jupiter and the largest moon in the
solar system larger even than the planet
Mercury
if this orbited the Sun we would call it
a planet but in all its Jupiter so it's
a moon covered in glaciers and possibly
also got a briny ocean underneath sleep
in a protected layer there so another
potential habitat for life in the
largest moon of Jupiter and the fourth
of the Galilean moons discovered by
Galileo with his first telescope he saw
all four of these is Callisto and it's
very old surface covered in dark
material with new craters marked out
brighter where they've brought fresh
material to the surface so geologically
fairly dead looking moon that one now we
pull back from Jupiter which is going to
hop next door and zoom in on Saturn
which is the other of the bright objects
lined up
so if we do that we'll see Saturn this
was the first object I have a sore
throat a telescope and it looks like
this this is what I saw with the disk of
the planet and the rings around it
immediately obvious and some moons and
you'll find that the more powerful your
telescope the more moons you'll be able
to see even with binoculars you'll see
the brightest one they are Titan out to
the left the orange looking one but then
the next one rear and the Oni and tifos
are also easy to track down with a small
telescope remember the large telescope
you can go even further and identify
several more it's a zoomed in view we
got the planet with the subtle cloud
belts across it and of course the Rings
with the gaps between the a and the B
ring the main dark gap there is the
Cassini division
here's Titan the largest moon of Saturn
nearly as big as Ganymede and this also
is actually larger than mercury and
really is a very interesting world in
its own right it's got a very thick
atmosphere thicker than the Earth's full
of this orange smog of organic chemicals
and we dropped a probe the hogan's probe
under that and parachutes you down to
the surface and saw lakes and rivers but
there are rivers of liquid methane at
minus 160 degrees all the water is
frozen up hard as steel but the
hydrological cycle of Earth is mirrored
with a methane cycle with snow and rain
and rivers and lakes and erosion all
caused by the same processes just using
a different fluid mechanism so we're now
going to let time move forward to 4:00
a.m. just a few moments before dawn and
bring the thing to a stop because we
just want to have a little look at some
of the other planets which are lurking
really in the very much the pre-dawn sky
and they're gonna get better they're
gonna separate away from the Sun and
we'll get a better view of them that was
the international space
station whizzing across there here we
have Mars the Red Planet and it's
looking like a 3/4 shape at the moment
but the earth is going to overtake it on
the inside and when it does so it will
give us a spectacular view we'll be at
the closest approach and see the full
disk gives the planet it's got the two
moons there Phobos and Deimos fear and
panic appropriately named for Mars the
God of War where we zoom in on the disk
we'll see the polar cap at the bottom
there till it goes out of shots the gash
in the ground to the right is Valles
Marineris the Martian Grand Canyon and
you can see three big volcanoes in a row
top center and to the left of them near
the top that's the largest volcano in
the solar system Olympus Mons three
times the height of mountains on earth
so that's absolutely vast and now
another planets also over here in the
pre-dawn sky is the planet Uranus
Neptune is around - but you don't have
time to look at this at the moment
here's what it would look like a small
greenish disc you really can see this
with a modest sized telescope it's
overlooked for many years but eventually
Sir William Herschel spotted it and you
can see some of its moons they're
clustered around it now because Uranus
orbits tipped over on its side
they those moons seem to move around it
as if they're going around the clock
face and you can see the angle of its
axis judge it by its rings it has set of
rings that not very prominent but in
fact all four of the giant outer planets
have sets of rings
it's just that statins are enormous ly
much more dense and bright than any of
the other three so that was a quick look
at Uranus and now if we pull back we see
the dawn is coming up over to the east
there and a very bright object is Venus
now we've been looking at the
in the evening sky as the evening star
as they call it of course it's not
really a star at all it's a planet but
now it's doing its impression of the
morning star and coming up just before
the Sun does and it's showing a very
thin present that way
now we never see very much by way of
detail on the planet Venus because again
has a very very thick atmosphere a
hundred times as thick as our own and
that's just not possible to see through
it that with obstacle wavelengths or
indeed with infrared we've only been
able to see the surface either through
use of radar or one or two Russian
probes managed to make it down through
the clouds and cope with the boiling
temperatures of 400 degrees C plus on
the ground and the enormous pressure of
a hundred atmospheres and the fact it
rains battery acid so they managed to
get a few photographs of the ground so
that's Venus and that's the last object
on the tour for this the first of July
planetarium show so we'll pull back out
to a white wide shot and then we'll let
time run forwards and the sky will soon
change color back to its familiar blue
because the Sun will rise with horizon
and even the bright planets and the
stars will fade out washed out
completely here we go by the rising
brightness from the Sun so hope you
enjoyed that half an hour to go all the
way through from the sunset to sunrise
and to show you some of the objects to
look out for and where to look in the
night sky for July thank you very much